#
# $Id: dnstracer.pod,v 1.19 2004/07/08 11:15:42 mavetju Exp $
#

=head1 NAME

B<dnstracer> - trace a chain of DNS servers to the source

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<dnstracer> [B<options>] I<name>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<dnstracer> determines where a given Domain Name Server (DNS) gets
its information from, and follows the chain of DNS servers back to
the servers which know the data.

Options are:

=over 8

=item B<-c>

Disable local caching.

=item B<-C>

Enable negative caching.

=item B<-o>

Enable overview of received answers at the end.

=item B<-q I<queryclass>>

Change the query-class, default is A. You can either specify a
number of the type (if you're brave) or one of the following strings:
a, aaaa, a6, soa, cname, hinfo, mx, ns, txt and ptr.

=item B<-r I<retries>>

Number of retries for DNS requests, default 3.

=item B<-s I<server>>

DNS server to use for the initial request, default is aquired from
the system. If a dot is specified (.), A.ROOT-SERVERS.NET will be
used.

=item B<-v>

Be verbose on what sent or received.

=item B<-4>

Use only IPv4 servers, don't query IPv6 servers (only available
when IPv6 support hasn't been disabled)

=item B<-S I<sourceaddress>>

Use this as source-address for the outgoing packets.

=back

=head1 HOW IT WORKS

It sends the specified name-server a non-recursive request for the
name.

Non-recursive means: if the name-server knows it, it will return
the data requested. If the name-server doesn't know it, it will
return pointers to name-servers that are authoritive for the domain
part in the name or it will return the addresses of the root
name-servers.

If the name server does returns an authoritative answer for the name,
the next server is queried. If it returns an non-authoritative
answer for the name, the name servers in the authority records will
be queried.

The program stops if all name-servers are queried.

Make sure the server you're querying doesn't do forwarding towards
other servers, as dnstracer is not able to detect this for you.

It detects so called lame servers, which are name-servers which has
been told to have information about a certain domain, but don't
have this information.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Search for the A record of www.mavetju.org on your local nameserver:

dnstracer www.mavetju.org

Search for the MX record of mavetju.org on the root-nameservers:

dnstracer C<-s> . C<-q> mx mavetju.org

Search for the PTR record (hostname) of 212.204.230.141:

dnstracer C<-q> ptr 141.230.204.212.in-addr.arpa

And for IPv6 addresses:

dnstracer C<-q> ptr C<-s> . C<-o> 2.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.6.4.0.2.0.0.0.0.8.b.0.e.f.f.3.ip6.int

=head1 SEE ALSO

ntptrace(8), traceroute(8), dig(1)

=head1 AUTHOR

Edwin Groothuis, edwin@mavetju.org (http://www.mavetju.org)

See http://www.mavetju.org/contacts.php for mailing-lists.
